Today's interview is with Harry E. Whitmore,
Assistant Director of the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station at Texas A&M University.
Today's date is August 3rd, 1982.
Let's begin, Mr. Whitmore, by your telling us
something about your early years. Where and when
were you born? I was born in Denison, Texas on
December the 7th, 1920.
What was the occupation of your father? My father
was a salesman. He sold almost anything. Paint.
Independent salesman.
And he traveled quite a bit. But he worked for a lot
of different companies selling different
things. Did you spend all your boyhood in Denison?
Yes, I left there to come to A&M when I was 16. You
graduated from high school at Jefferson? Yes. So
you graduated in 1936 then? Right. And you came
here and you studied in 1940? I got out A&M in 42. 42.
And you studied mechanical engineering? Right.
What was the reason that you chose to study
engineering? Oh, a pure accident, I guess. I
didn't have any idea what I was doing at that time.
But it turned out to be pretty good. Were you
mechanically inclined as a youth? Not
particularly. It was the popular thing to do in
those days, and like it is today. Did you have a
strong background in mathematics? Yes, I had math
and physics and all that in high school. Is that
essential to the Master of Engineering program? I
think it is, and it's even more so today, because
it's a lot harder today than it was when I took it. I
didn't even
know what a computer was. I was here four years and
left here and went into the Army. Everybody did.
I'm 42. No, I got out of high school in 36. You came
here in 38. There was a two-year period between
when you came here and I came here in 38. What was it
like when you were a student here back in the late
30s? Well, it was all military, of course. There
was a lot of hazing, but an awful lot of fun. There
weren't any women here, except my wife was from
Bryan, so there were a few here.
I'd say the traditions and spirit and all is about
the same as it is today. But it's a lot bigger now. I
think there were 6,000 students here when I came.
That was pretty large at that time. It was large.
What was the reason that you chose A&M to attend
over any other university? All my friends from
Denison came to A&M, so I came with them.
There wasn't anything particular about the
university. And, oh, I guess eight guys who
graduated the year before me from high school were
down here. So that was the real reason I came. When
you left in 1942, you went to the Army. Right.
Where? Where did I go first? Camp Perry, Ohio. No,
that's wrong.
I went to the San Antonio Arsenal for about a month,
merely to get processed, and then I went to Camp
Perry, Ohio. Is that P-E-A-R-Y or P-E-E-R-Y?
P-E-R-R-Y. And how long were you there? About
three or four months, maybe five. Then I went to
Camp Thunston.
You know, we get into this, it'll take. I've lived
in 32 houses in the 20 years I was in the Army. Oh, you
were in the Army 20 years. Oh, okay. Well, we won't
go into each of them. But I, in general, I was in
Europe during World War II and in Korea, but mainly
I was in guided missile business. When you entered
the Army, what rank did you face? First, a second
lieutenant. A second lieutenant. What did you
promote to eventually? A colonel. A colonel. When
were you promoted to colonel? I guess that was in
about 58, 1958.
See, I got out of the Army in 1962.
So during the long time you were in the military,
what were some of the places that you could study?
Just give me a sample of five or six places. I was at
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California
Institute of Technology. I was at Douglas
Aircraft Company. I was at... Where? In Santa
Monica. And at White Sands Missile Range. and at
the Ballistic Research Laboratory at Aberdeen,
Maryland,
and with the Missile Command of the Air Force in
Westchester, California. So it was mainly, and I
was in Japan two years, and in Korea a year, and in
Europe about two and a half years. During this time
you were in the military, did you concentrate on
any one particular area? Guided missiles. Guided
missiles. Tell me something about that, please.
Well, let's see. The Army had all of the missile
business in the early days, starting in about 46 at
the Jet Propulsion Lab in California is where it
all started. Under Dr. Von Karman, And I guess the
Army had about 10 missiles they worked on. The
first one was the Corporal, and the Honest John,
and the Nike, and the Talos. T-A-L-O-S.
It was joint with the Navy. And Nike, Hercules, and
the Sergeant, the Redstone. And at about that
point, the Air Force got in the act. I guess that was
1956.
And they took over the large missiles, the Atlas. I
worked on the Atlas Centaur and General Dynamics
after I got out again. And that was the start of the
space program, the Agena, the Centaur, the Atlas.
And the Redstone, I guess, was the one, it was an
Army missile that put the first satellite into
orbit. And when that happened, I was in White
Sands, and that was actually before the Russians
put up Sputnik, but it wasn't much of a satellite.
And since then, I think you, I guess I got out of the
Army about,
Well, the last thing I worked on the Army was the
advanced satellite, which was a communications
satellite. And I did that in California and
Westchester with the Air Force, because the Air
Force at that point had taken over the missiles,
the big ones. You do research regarding guided
missiles. Could you tell me a little more about
that, what kind of research you did? Well, I don't
know. I guess you'd call it development, really. I
don't think any missile has ever been started to be
built that wasn't state of the art. In other words,
that was a rule. And so there's no research
involved in building guided missiles, which is
what I did. So I guess you would call it development
in our research. It involved pushing the state of
the art. But there was never any doubt that they
could be built. They wouldn't have started
them. The Nike was probably the most complicated,
which was a surface-to-air missile that defended
the country, I guess, 20 years. There's still Nike
bases that are activated.
It was mainly a guidance problem, how to get the
missile to where the airplane was. You served in
the Army during both war and peacetime. As far as an
officer in the Army, how is it different in wartime
and peacetime? Is there any difference in what you
do? Well, yes. You get shot at in wartime.
Peacetime, you don't. And that's the rather broad
subject. I wasn't an infantry officer. And during
peacetime, the major part of the Army, which is the
fighting people, they maneuver and get ready to
fight. And the more time they get shot. Where were
you stationed during World War II? I was with the
9th Armored Division and it landed in Normandy and
went clear through to the Russians' office. And I
was with it the whole time. I was division ordnance
officer.
Which was, that was a pretty nice war, frankly. And
that's a nice thing. Was you married before or
after the war? Before. Your wife stayed at Brown
while you were with Olsen. Right.
And you said you moved, you lived in 32 different
houses while you were in the military. Right.
That's over 20 years. Some of them were in the same
town or on the same army base. OK, you retired.
While you were in the military, did you do any
graduate work during that time? Yes, I took a
master's degree at Purdue. Purdue, Indiana. What
time was that report then? That's the
chancellor's old home. Lafayette, Indiana.
Lafayette. I went first in 50 and went a year, and
they took me out and sent me to Korea, and then I went
back in 55 and finished. You've done a master of
science in mechanical engineering. Did you do any
research regarding the thesis? No. What was the
subject of your program? It was jet propulsion.
Jet propulsion.
Okay, then let's take it back to 1962 when you
retired from the military. Where did you go then? I
went to General Dynamics Astronautics in San
Diego and worked on the Atlas. As a what? As a
systems engineer. And how long were you there? I
was systems engineering manager on the Atlas. I
was there about two years. And then where? You came
to A&M in 64? In what capacity? As head of the Space
Technology Division, which didn't exist. Of
which department? It's not in a department. It's
part of the Engineering Experiment Station. And
you held that until 1967 when you became assistant
director of the Engineering Experiment Station?
Associate director. Excuse me, associate
director.
What was the reason that you decided to leave
California to come back to Texas A&M? Well, my wife
was from here, and both her parents were in bad
health. That had a lot to do with it, but also
California was getting pretty damn wild, and I was
terrified of the traffic. And I came here to make a
speech on jet propulsion, Fred Benson, I told him
he wasn't getting with the space program and A&M
had nothing in the way of space. He said, well, why
don't you come back here and fix it? So I did. It was a
combination
of things. So A&M didn't get involved in the space
program until 64. I take that back. John Calhoun
had just received the first NASA grant in the state
of Texas as principal investigator for A&M. And
the minute I got here, he turned it over to me. Don
Calvin was, I guess he was academic vice president
then. Or was he? Anyway, he'd been dean of
engineering. What were some of the things some of
the innovations that came with the introduction
of space program research here? Well, the Olney
Teague Building, for one thing, was built by NASA
in order to enhance the space program.
It wasn't too long until the program ran about $2
million a year there for 10 years. We did a lot of
work with Houston. And we have the only wind tunnel
in this part of the country And Houston did a lot of
work with us there. And it was spread out not only
through engineering, but in physics and
mathematics
all over the place. Are there any specific things
that you can think of that A&M contributed to the
space program? Yes, if you look out in the lobby,
you'll see a model of the space shuttle that was
built here entirely and tested. What year was
that? Oh, that was about six years ago. Obviously
before they flew the first one. I'd say six years
ago. That's kind of interesting. We did an awful
lot of work with Houston on heat shields for the
shuttle and communications for the space
shuttle.
we had here for up until
a year ago the original graph that john calvin got
in 64 was still in force a year ago they renewed it
each year it was the oldest nasa grant in the
country and out of it grew our remote sensing
center which is the largest I guess, in the world.
They do all kinds of work with the agricultural
people. I'd say the space program spun off the
remote sensing center. It built the old ET
building. And there are many programs in our space
right now that grew out of the old Themis program.
which was DOD, but our ability to get into that
stemmed from working the space program. So what's
happened, it sort of spun out and made a lot of other
things and then really it
evolved. What are some of the things that A&M is
doing now regarding the space program?
We're still doing a lot of wind tunnel testing and
work on the shuttle, and I guess we almost will. The
EE department is doing quite a bit of work in the
communications area. How do you communicate from
there, from the ground, the satellites
and the remote sensing center has all kinds of NASA
programs. How do you improve on sensors that go in
satellites? But mainly, how do you utilize the
data that you get from a satellite? What you get is
way more data than you want. So how do you separate
out the wheat from the chaff? It's a big program.
The Landsat satellite produces tons of data, and
NASA provides that to us. And out of that, you can
predict the world wheat crop. You can tell whether
a pecan orchard is infected with disease or not.
You can tell how wet the ground is here
It's a matter of taking satellite data and finding
out more and more and more things every day. It's an
information processing operation. And this data
comes from radar, visible, infrared, so you've
got many different
wavelengths of radiation, really, is what you're
working with, be it light, radar, whatever. And
how do you sort that out is a real problem in applied
mathematics and many other things. And we do a good
job at that. In your capacity, do you work with
students, or how do you work with them? All of our
research program involves graduate students and
also wherever possible undergraduate students
because that's what turns an undergraduate
student into a graduate student is to get him
interested in the research. How many graduate
students do you have involved in this type of
research? Oh, I would guess around
six or seven hundred. If
somebody came up to you and told you they thought
the money the taxpayers put into the space program
had been a waste of money, how would you reply to
that? Well, to some extent,
it would be hard to defend because it's an awful lot
of money. But the only way you could defend it is to
point out the spinoffs from it. which are new
materials, new medicine,
the ability to do all these things I just said,
remote sensing. And I don't believe I could
justify it on a straight economic basis, nor would
I try, nor do I see any reason to. What do they say?
Why do you climb mountains? Because they're
there. I think we'll see an awful lot spin off of the
shuttle that hasn't shown up. That's a whole
different world. That's a complete freight car.
You could put it in that thing and put it in orbit.
And up to now, we've been working with little bitty
things. Now you can put this whole floor up in
orbit. It'll become commercial. Where do the
funds to operate your research program come from?
We have about $30 million a year of that. Roughly,
it's a third federal government, a third state,
and a third other industry foundation.
And of the state, about Half of it is state revenue.
The other half is work we do for other state
agencies. How
many people do you have working under your
service? Well, I don't want to count all the
students and see what What we have is a lot of parts
of people. So I would guess involved are about
1,000 people. Now, full-time equivalent people,
probably about 600. Many of them are
three-quarter time or half time or very And from
day to day, it changes by 20%, whether they're
going to go teach some more or research some more.
Have you done any teaching while you've been here?
No. What are some of the major changes that you've
seen since you've been here over the last 18 years?
Well, all these new buildings, for one thing, and
it's been magnificent. I think at one point there
was $90 million worth of construction going on
when this building was being built. There was a lot
of others being built. It's really the fiscal plan
has at least tripled. The red tape has tripled, and
that's partially due to the federal government,
partially due to the state, and partially due to
just getting bigger. The bigger you get, the more
red tape there is. There's no way to cut through the
red tape?
Oh, yeah, there's ways. We don't want to go into
that. That's real complicated. Of course, the
thing that has been most impressive is the quality
of the people here. They have really got some
crackerjack people. And this is not yet known in
general. The public really doesn't know what's
going on at A&M. Even the former students don't
know. And that's one thing we need to work on. And
that is
to not improve our image falsely, because we don't
have to. But just get the word out. We did a lousy job
of that. And this is by far the best group of
engineering talent in the world. And I guess MIT
and Caltech have ten times the reputation we did.
It's in that way anymore than it was 18 years ago.
What's the reason you've been able to attract such
top-ranking freshmen? Well, it's warmer here.
And
the resources of Texas A&M are by far better than
most places. The permanent university fund is
why. In fact, if I had to pick one thing, that's it.
That's why. And it really makes
a difference. A lot of people would like to have it.
Do you think that the permanent university fund is
going to be divided up among these other smaller
universities in the state? There will be a very
concerted effort to do that. I hope not. Whether it
will or won't depends on how good we defend it.
Because without it, we wouldn't be first class.
And the University of Texas is a first class
school, too.
how broad engineering research is. Well,
the best way to get that across to anybody is, I
think, through examples of the things that we are
doing. And this is an engineering research
program. And it's pretty obvious that the basic
engineering disciplines, the departments, MA,
the old timers, or MA electrical, And chemical.
And then they added aerospace and industrial.
And what else we got? Civil, probably the oldest.
And nuclear engineering and petroleum
engineering. That, to most people, is
engineering. The problem is nowadays is putting
them together. There is not any single problem of
work that I know of that can be solved by any one
department. That's just not in the game. So you
really can't have a mechanical engineering
research program because mechanical engineers
can only contribute to a broader solution of a
problem that's worth solving. So what we do is put
mechanicals, industrials, and electricals
together and do remote sensing, for example.
Quite often, one of the departments will take the
lead in a research problem, but then go get the help
they need from other departments to really do the
job. But even broader than that, We now have added
some things that you probably wouldn't call
engineering. You might not call remote sensing
engineering, because it does involve
agriculture and hydraulics and all sorts of
things. And you probably wouldn't agree that food
protein research is engineering, but we have food
protein research program in tea that's about a
million and a half a year. And it's largely an
engineering problem.
And now we have added the teas of business and
technology. We have a division of teas in the
business college. in order that we can get what we
do out on the street and use, because engineers
aren't very good at business people. That's the
root. We have a geotechnology division, which
couples with the College of Geosciences. And we
put together a team of engineers and geosciences
to solve
problems. And we got one known as Technology and
Society, which is the liberal arts college. And we
couple them up with engineers and do urban work,
because they can keep us from getting all the folks
mad at us. So we have brought in the engineering, at
least what is known as the engineering experiment
station, to include business, geosciences,
The College of Liberal Arts, the College of
Education has a TEAS division.
We run the data processing center for the whole
system. We run the nuclear science center for the
whole system. So it gets to be kind of spread out the
time you put all this together.
The reason we do it is that you just flat can't solve
a problem using just one decimal. And see, our
charter is not higher education. Our charter is
economic development for the state of Texas. And
the fact that we use students, frankly, is because
they're damn cheap labor. and good labor. And they
have a job. We don't do it so they can get an
education. If they get one, that's great. And
we'll try to aim it towards that. But we hire an
awful lot of students strictly to work.
So that's a lot of fun.
And most of our money, well, all but 17% of it, we go
out and contract and earn. It doesn't come from the
state. How do you go about contracting? Well,
you've got to find a man who has a problem with some
money and that we have the talent to solve. And then
you get the guy who. knows how to solve it, eyeball
to eyeball with the guy with the money, that's the
problem. And they write a contract, and he pays us
to solve this problem. What are some of the
companies that you've had contracts with? I was
just looking at that. There's about 200. Well,
just straightforward. Oh, OK. We've done work
with General Electric, LTV in Dallas, Douglas
Aircraft.
We're
doing a whole lot of work with the electric car
companies. In fact, we have a standing contract
with Seven that fit into this region, Dallas
Paralyte, Houston Paralyte, and all of them in
this part of the country. We do work with the
Electric Power Research Institute, which is a
big, big deal. And all of the petroleum companies I
don't think all of them that are in Houston. I don't
know of any that we have working with Exxon. What
are some of the type of work that you've done with
this contract? Well, let's take a specific
example that's kind of interesting. We have
wanted, of course, Texas is loaded with lignite,
most of which you can't get at by digging. You've
got to, 90% of it is, below 200 feet, which is about
the economic depth to dig it up. So we went out here
by the airport and drilled nine wells down into a
lignite seam. And you have to monitor them, and you
got all the EPA problems. But the final result was,
You burn it here, and it burns over to this hole, and
you take the gas out, and that has quite a bit of BTU
value. So we did that with a little bit of our own
money to show we had some hope. It did burn about 30
minutes and brought us about five oil companies,
Dow Chemical, and another non-oil company. I came
here and looked at it, and they've been sponsoring
a program to pursue that research for about five
years now. At about a quarter of a million dollars a
year. And right now we're doing it over at Rockdale
on the Alcoa property. So that's how that was
yielded in Alcoa. That's an example. And they paid
for all of it except that. But you've got to prove to
them. that you have some hope of getting there. And
that's why we need a little bit of that 17% state
money to start up things until we can get some
credibility. Have you had any problems getting
state funds? Has there been any opposition to
funding the program? None at all. Well, you go to
the state legislature and say you give me $17 and
I'll get you $100 for it. You don't have any problem
at all. You go asking for $100, you're going to have
a real problem. But see, we get out of the $30
million, to put it in other terms, we get about $4
million from the state. You say, you give me $4 and
I'll get you $30 to do research on state problems.
How could anybody turn that down? It's not his
problem. We don't have a money problem. We have
people problems. We're a real short people. And
the mean. Right. Right. Right.
Is there anything else you want to add? I'm about to
run out and so is my voice. What's wrong with me? I
think I'm getting it. I think it started this
morning. I don't feel bad. It's just sort of
hoarse. I appreciate
you taking the time to talk with me. I enjoy it. I
like talking about teams. It's a pretty
interesting place.